Keyword: corrosion
CH OH(l)
6CO (aq)
12H O(l)
C H O (aq)
Sunlight Chlorophyll
(A) and (B) [Fig. 1.8 (b)].
Also, compare the colour of the iron nails
dipped in the copper sulphate solution
with the one kept aside [Fig. 1.8 (b)].
Figure 1.8
Heat
2CuO
If hydrogen gas is passed over this heated material (CuO), the black
coating on the surface turns brown as the reverse reaction takes place
and copper is obtained. CuO +H Cu+H O
and changes into a white substance, magnesium oxide. Is magnesium being oxidised or
reduced in this reaction? 1.3.1 Corrosion
You must have observed that iron articles are shiny when new, but get
coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time. This process
is commonly known as rusting of iron. Some other metals also get
process is called corrosion. The black coating on silver and the green
coating on copper are other examples of corrosion.
Corrosion causes damage to car bodies, bridges, iron railings, ships
and to all objects made of metals, specially those of iron. Corrosion of
iron is a serious problem. Every year an enormous amount of money is
spent to replace damaged iron. You will learn more about corrosion in Chapter 3.
1.3.2 Rancidity
Have you ever tasted or smelt the fat/oil containing food materials left
for a long time?
Name the element ‘X’ and the black coloured compound formed.
Why do we apply paint on iron articles?
Oil and fat containing food items are flushed with nitrogen. Why?
Explain the following terms with one example each. Corrosion Rancidity
Group  Activity Perform the following activity.

Keyword: combination reaction
“Facts are not science — as the dictionary is not literature.” Martin H. Fischer
Chemical Reactions and Equations
onsider the following situations of daily life and think what happens when –
milk is left at room temperature during summers.
an iron tawa/pan/nail is left exposed to humid atmosphere. grapes get fermented.
has taken place? Let us perform some activities to find the answer to
these questions. CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher’s assistance. It
would be better if students wear suitable eyeglasses. Clean a magnesium ribbon
about 3-4 cm long by rubbing it with sandpaper. Hold it with a pair of tongs.
Burn it using a spirit lamp or burner and collect the ash so
formed in a watch-glass as shown in Fig. 1.1. Burn  the
magnesium ribbon keeping it away as far as possible from your eyes. Figure 1.1
Burning of a magnesium ribbon in air and collection of magnesium
oxide in a watch-glass What do you observe?
2024-25You must have observed that magnesium ribbon burns with a
dazzling white flame and changes into a white powder. This powder is
magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction between magnesium
and oxygen present in the air. Take lead nitrate solution in a test tube.
Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask or a test tube.
Add dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid to this
(Fig. 1.2).
CAUTION: Handle the acid with care. Add potassium iodide solution to this.
Do you observe anything happening around the zinc granules? What do you observe?
Touch the conical flask or test tube. Is there any change in its temperature?
From the above three activities, we can say that any of
the following observations helps us to determine whether
word-equation. The word-equation for the above reaction would be –
Magnesium + Oxygen →Magnesium oxide
(Reactants)
(Product)
The substances that undergo chemical change in the reaction (1.1),
arrow placed between them. The reactants are written on the left-hand
side (LHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. Similarly, products are
written on the right-hand side (RHS) with a plus sign (+) between them.
The arrowhead points towards the products, and shows the direction of
the reaction. Science 2024-251.1.1 Writing a Chemical Equation
chemical reaction. If you recall formulae of magnesium, oxygen and
magnesium oxide, the above word-equation can be written as –
Mg + O2  →  MgO
Count and compare the number of atoms of each element on the
LHS and RHS of the arrow. Is the number of atoms of each element the
that contains the maximum number of atoms. It may be a reactant or a
product. In that compound, select the element which has the maximum
number of atoms. Using these criteria, we select Fe3O4 and the element
oxygen in it. There are four oxygen atoms on the RHS and only one on the LHS.
To balance the oxygen atoms – Atoms of In reactants In products oxygen Initial
1 (in H2O)
4 (in Fe3O4)
(ii)
To balance To equalise the number of atoms, it must be remembered that we
balanced, that is, iron. Atoms of In reactants In products iron Initial
1 (in Fe)
3 (in Fe3O4)
To balance To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the LHS.
of the reactants and products are mentioned along with their chemical
formulae. The gaseous, liquid, aqueous and solid states of reactants
and products are represented by the notations (g), (l), (aq) and (s),
respectively. The word aqueous (aq) is written if the reactant or product
is present as a solution in water.
The balanced Eq. (1.9) becomes
3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g)  → Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)
Note that the symbol (g) is used with H2O to indicate that in this
reaction water is used in the form of steam.
catalyst, etc., for the reaction are indicated above and/or below the arrow
in the equation. For example –
CO(g) + 2H (g)
340atm
CH OH(l)
6CO (aq)
12H O(l)
C H O (aq)
Sunlight Chlorophyll
(aq)
6H O(l)
(Glucose)
Using these steps, can you balance Eq. (1.2) given in the text earlier?
Why should a magnesium ribbon be cleaned before burning in air?
Write the balanced equation for the following chemical reactions.
(i) Hydrogen + Chlorine → Hydrogen chloride
(ii) Sodium hydroxide solution (in water) reacts with hydrochloric
acid solution (in water) to produce sodium chloride solution and
water.
(ii) Barium chloride + Aluminium sulphate →  Barium sulphate +
Aluminium chloride
(iii) Sodium + Water  → Sodium hydroxide + Hydrogen
Write a balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the
following reactions.
(i) Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulphate in water react
to give insoluble barium sulphate and the solution of sodium chloride.
We have learnt in Class IX that during a chemical reaction atoms of one
element do not change into those of another element. Nor do atoms
disappear from the mixture or appear from elsewhere. Actually, chemical
reactions involve the breaking and making of bonds between atoms to
produce new substances. You will study about types of bonds formed
between atoms in Chapters 3 and 4. 1.2.1 Combination Reaction
Take a small amount of calcium oxide or quick lime in a beaker.
Slowly add water to this. Touch the beaker as shown in Fig. 1.3.
Do you feel any change in temperature? Formation of slaked
lime by the reaction of calcium oxide with water
Calcium oxide reacts vigorously with water to produce slaked lime
(calcium hydroxide) releasing a large amount of heat.
CaO(s)
H2O(l)  → Ca(OH)2(aq)    +   Heat
(Quick lime)
(Slaked lime)
In this reaction, calcium oxide and water combine to form a single
product, calcium hydroxide. Such a reaction in which a single product
is formed from two or more reactants is known as a combination reaction. Science
2024-25Do You Know?
A solution of slaked lime produced by the reaction 1.13 is used for whitewashing
walls. Calcium hydroxide reacts slowly with the carbon dioxide in air to form a thin
layer of calcium carbonate on the walls. Calcium carbonate is  formed after two to
three days of whitewashing and gives a shiny finish to the walls. It is interesting to note
that the chemical formula for marble is also CaCO3.
Ca(OH)2(aq) + CO2(g)
CaCO3(s)
+ H2O(l)
hydroxide)
carbonate)
Let us discuss some more examples of combination reactions. Burning of coal
C(s) + O2(g)  → CO2(g)
Formation of water from H2(g) and O2(g)
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)
In simple language we can say that when two or more substances
(elements or compounds) combine to form a single product, the reactions
are called combination reactions.
In Activity 1.4, we also observed that a large amount of heat is evolved.
This makes the reaction mixture warm. Reactions in which heat is
released along with the formation of products are called exothermic
chemical reactions. Other examples of exothermic reactions are –
carbohydrates. These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose.
This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provides
energy. The special name of this reaction is respiration, the process of
which you will study in Chapter 6.
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(aq) → 6CO2(aq) + 6H2O(l) + energy
Take about 2 g ferrous sulphate crystals in a dry boiling tube.
Note the colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals.
Heat the boiling tube over the  flame  of
a burner or spirit lamp as shown in Fig. 1.4.
Observe the colour of the crystals after heating. Figure 1.4
Correct way of heating the boiling tube containing crystals of ferrous sulphate
and of smelling the odour
Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals
has changed? You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning sulphur.
2FeSO4(s)
Heat
 Fe2O3(s)  +  SO2(g)  + SO3(g)
(Ferrous sulphate)
sulphate crystals (FeSO4. 7H2O) lose water when heated and the colour
of the crystals changes. It then decomposes to ferric oxide (Fe2O3),
sulphur dioxide (SO2) and sulphur trioxide (SO3). Ferric oxide is a solid,
while SO2 and SO3 are gases.
Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon
These fumes are of nitrogen dioxide (NO2). The
reaction that takes place is – Figure 1.5
Heating of lead nitrate and
emission of nitrogen dioxide Science
2024-252Pb(NO3)2(s)
2PbO(s)
4NO2(g)  +  O2(g)
(Lead nitrate)
apparatus undisturbed for some time. You will observe the formation of bubbles
at both the electrodes. These bubbles displace water in the test tubes.
Figure 1.6 Electrolysis of water
Is the volume of the gas collected the same in both the test tubes?
Once the test tubes are filled with the respective gases, remove them carefully.
What happens in each case? Which gas is present in each test tube?
Take about 2 g silver chloride in a china dish. What is its colour?
Place this china dish in sunlight for some time
(Fig. 1.7).
Observe the colour of the silver chloride after some time. Figure 1.7
Silver chloride turns grey in sunlight to form silver metal
You will see that white silver chloride turns grey in sunlight. This is
due to the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine by light.
2AgCl(s)
Sunlight
2Ag(s) + Cl2(g)
2024-25Silver bromide also behaves in the same way.
2AgBr(s)
2Ag(s) + Br2(g)
The above reactions are used in black and white photography.
about 20 minutes [Fig. 1.8 (a)]. Keep one
iron nail aside for comparison. After 20 minutes, take out the iron nails
from the copper sulphate solution. Compare the intensity of the blue colour
of copper sulphate solutions in test tubes
(A) and (B) [Fig. 1.8 (b)].
Also, compare the colour of the iron nails
dipped in the copper sulphate solution
with the one kept aside [Fig. 1.8 (b)].
Figure 1.8
(a) Iron nails dipped in copper sulphate solution
Science 2024-25Figure 1.8
Figure 1.8 (b) Iron nails and copper sulphate solutions compared before and after the experiment
Why does the iron nail become brownish in colour and the blue colour
of copper sulphate solution fades?
The following chemical reaction takes place in this Activity–
Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) →
FeSO4(aq)    +   Cu(s)
(Copper sulphate)
(Iron sulphate)
In this reaction, iron has displaced or removed another element,
copper, from copper sulphate solution. This reaction is known as
(Zinc sulphate)
Pb(s) + CuCl2(aq)   →
PbCl2(aq)     +     Cu(s)
(Copper chloride)
(Lead chloride)
Zinc and lead are more reactive elements than copper. They displace
copper from its compounds. 1.2.4 Double Displacement Reaction
Take about 3 mL of sodium sulphate solution in a test tube.
In another test tube, take about 3 mL of barium chloride solution.
Mix the two solutions (Fig. 1.9).
What do you observe? You will observe that a white substance, which is
insoluble in water, is formed. This insoluble substance
formed is known as a precipitate. Any reaction that
produces a precipitate can be called a precipitation reaction.
Formation of barium sulphate and sodium chloride
Na2SO4(aq) + BaCl2(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NaCl(aq)
(Sodium
sulphate)
chloride)
2024-25What causes this? The  white precipitate of BaSO4 is formed by the
reaction of
and Ba2+. The other product formed is sodium chloride
which remains in the solution. Such reactions in which there is an
exchange of ions between the reactants are called double displacement reactions.
Recall Activity 1.2, where you have mixed the solutions of lead(II) nitrate
and potassium iodide.
What was the colour of the precipitate formed? Can you name the compound
precipitated?
Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(iii) Is this also a double displacement reaction?
1.2.5 Oxidation and Reduction
Heat a china dish containing about 1 g
copper powder (Fig. 1.10).
What do you observe? The surface of copper powder becomes coated with
black copper(II) oxide. Why has this black
substance formed? This is because oxygen is added to copper and
copper oxide is formed. Oxidation of copper to copper oxide
2Cu + O2
2CuO
If hydrogen gas is passed over this heated material (CuO), the black
coating on the surface turns brown as the reverse reaction takes place
and copper is obtained. CuO +H Cu+H O
If a substance gains oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be oxidised.
If a substance loses oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be reduced.
During this reaction (1.29), the copper(II) oxide is losing oxygen and
and changes into a white substance, magnesium oxide. Is magnesium being oxidised or
reduced in this reaction? 1.3.1 Corrosion
You must have observed that iron articles are shiny when new, but get
coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time. This process
is commonly known as rusting of iron. Some other metals also get
in air tight containers helps to slow down oxidation. Do you know that
chips manufacturers usually flush bags of chips with gas such as
nitrogen to prevent the chips from getting oxidised ?
Why does the colour of copper sulphate solution change when
an iron nail is dipped in it?
Give an example of a double displacement reaction other than
the one given in Activity 1.10.
Identify the substances that are oxidised and the substances
that are reduced in the following reactions.
reaction, a single substance decomposes to give two or more substances.
Reactions in which heat is given out along with the products are called exothermic
reactions.
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.
When an element displaces another element from its compound, a displacement
reaction occurs.
Two different atoms or groups of atoms (ions) are exchanged in double displacement
reactions. Precipitation reactions produce insoluble salts.
Reactions also involve the gain or loss of oxygen or hydrogen by substances.
Oxidation is the gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen. Reduction is the loss of oxygen
or gain of hydrogen.
Which of the statements about the reaction below are incorrect?
2PbO(s) + C(s) → 2Pb(s) + CO2(g)
Lead is getting reduced. Carbon dioxide is getting oxidised.
Carbon is getting oxidised. Lead oxide is getting reduced.
(a) and (b)
(a) and (c)
(iii)
(a), (b) and (c)
(iv)
Fe2O3 + 2Al → Al2O3 + 2Fe
The above reaction is an example of a combination reaction.
double displacement reaction. Science
2024-25(c)
Chlorine gas and iron hydroxide are produced. No reaction takes place.
Iron salt and water are produced.
What is a balanced chemical equation? Why should chemical equations be balanced?
Translate the following statements into chemical equations and then balance them.
Hydrogen gas combines with nitrogen to form ammonia.
Hydrogen sulphide gas burns in air to give water and sulpur dioxide.
Barium chloride reacts with aluminium sulphate to give aluminium chloride
and a precipitate of barium sulphate.
Potassium metal reacts with water to give potassium hydroxide and hydrogen gas.
Balance the following chemical equations.
HNO3 + Ca(OH)2 → Ca(NO3)2 + H2O
NaOH + H2SO4 → Na2SO4 + H2O
NaCl + AgNO3 → AgCl + NaNO3
BaCl2 + H2SO4 → BaSO4 + HCl
Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions.
Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide  →  Calcium carbonate + Water
Zinc + Silver nitrate  →  Zinc nitrate + Silver
Aluminium + Copper chloride  →  Aluminium chloride + Copper
Barium chloride + Potassium sulphate → Barium sulphate + Potassium chloride
Write the balanced chemical equation for the following and identify the type of
reaction in each case.
Potassium bromide(aq) + Barium iodide(aq) →  Potassium iodide(aq) +
Barium bromide(s)
Zinc carbonate(s) →  Zinc oxide(s) + Carbon dioxide(g)
Hydrogen(g) + Chlorine(g)  →  Hydrogen chloride(g)
Group  Activity Perform the following activity.
Take four beakers and label them as A, B, C and D.
Put 25 mL of water in A, B and C beakers and copper sulphate solution in beaker D.
Measure and record the temperature of each liquid contained in the beakers above.
Add two spatulas of potassium sulphate, ammonium nitrate, anhydrous copper
sulphate and fine iron fillings to beakers A, B, C and D respectively and stir.
Finally measure and record the temperature of each of the mixture above.
Find out which reactions are exothermic and which ones are endothermic in nature.
Science

Keyword: displacement reaction
apparatus undisturbed for some time. You will observe the formation of bubbles
at both the electrodes. These bubbles displace water in the test tubes.
Figure 1.6 Electrolysis of water
Is the volume of the gas collected the same in both the test tubes?
Once the test tubes are filled with the respective gases, remove them carefully.
water. Why is the amount of gas collected in one of the test tubes in Activity
1.7 double of the amount collected in the other? Name this gas.
1.2.3  Displacement Reaction Take three iron nails and clean them by
rubbing with sand paper.
Take two test tubes marked as (A) and
FeSO4(aq)    +   Cu(s)
(Copper sulphate)
(Iron sulphate)
In this reaction, iron has displaced or removed another element,
copper, from copper sulphate solution. This reaction is known as
displacement reaction. Other examples of displacement reactions are
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq)   →
ZnSO4(aq)   +     Cu(s)
(Zinc sulphate)
Pb(s) + CuCl2(aq)   →
PbCl2(aq)     +     Cu(s)
(Copper chloride)
(Lead chloride)
Zinc and lead are more reactive elements than copper. They displace
copper from its compounds. 1.2.4 Double Displacement Reaction
Take about 3 mL of sodium sulphate solution in a test tube.
2024-25What causes this? The  white precipitate of BaSO4 is formed by the
reaction of
and Ba2+. The other product formed is sodium chloride
which remains in the solution. Such reactions in which there is an
exchange of ions between the reactants are called double displacement reactions.
Recall Activity 1.2, where you have mixed the solutions of lead(II) nitrate
and potassium iodide.
What was the colour of the precipitate formed? Can you name the compound
precipitated?
(ii)
Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(iii) Is this also a double displacement reaction?
1.2.5 Oxidation and Reduction
an iron nail is dipped in it?
Give an example of a double displacement reaction other than
the one given in Activity 1.10.
Identify the substances that are oxidised and the substances
that are reduced in the following reactions.
reaction, a single substance decomposes to give two or more substances.
Reactions in which heat is given out along with the products are called exothermic
reactions.
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.
When an element displaces another element from its compound, a displacement
reaction occurs.
Two different atoms or groups of atoms (ions) are exchanged in double displacement
reactions. Precipitation reactions produce insoluble salts.
Reactions also involve the gain or loss of oxygen or hydrogen by substances.
(iv)
Fe2O3 + 2Al → Al2O3 + 2Fe
The above reaction is an example of a combination reaction.
double displacement reaction. Science
2024-25(c)

